see now the sense even if you're just
looking at this one chart of how
difficult it is to pin down precisely
what the gender gap is but you know what
the University of Toronto employs
exactly the sort of people who have that
skill set so this is the strange thing
about dr. Jordan Peterson this
controversy has been haunting him his
whole life when I was a student the
University of Toronto
decades ago it haunted me and my life
was a huge controversy there he's been
at the center of this storm and he's
been commenting on the press for all
these years and it's very strange that
he never took an interest in the social
science process of analysis to identify
whether or not there was a problem and
then to mathematically determine the
extent of the problem you might have
noticed that I don't particularly
subscribe to this 21st century trend of
speaking your truth of speaking about
life in terms of one's own truth his
truth her truth my truth your truth I'm
still kind of stuck on this concept of
the truth as oppressive as that may seem
and you know a guy like Jordan Peterson
although he is somewhat of a
conservative if not outright fascist
political vigor you know it's really
strange that he actually personifies
that far or left-wing stereotype of
having a certain kind of creative
plasticity with the truth and never has
this been more true to reference to what
he has to say about um gender equality
and the so-called pay gap which is to
say the inequality between the amount of
money men earn and the amount of money
women are and not only have I seen him
asked about this in general terms in
interviews but often enough the question
is put to him with reference to the
university that he was and is a
professor at for so many years the
University of Toronto I'm now a hundred
years old but when I was a young man I
also was a student at University of
Toronto and at that time already decades
ago
there was an ongoing controversy about
the pay gap between men and women now
when people are dishonest it's very
difficult to tell what it is they're
being dishonest about and why Jordan
Peterson takes this issue of the gender
pay gap and whenever he's asked about it
or ever he gives a lecture about it or
speaks on it he twists the topic so that
he can express his personal
philosophical convictions about the
so-called Big Five personality test he
twists the question so that he can give
an irrelevant answer about agreeableness
and his personal philosophy that the
problem most women have not all most
women and some men have is that they are
too agreeable to get paid a higher rate
in a capitalist free-market situation
now the problem with that philosophy is
not whether it is right or wrong not the
extent to which it's gonna lead you into
leading a bad life the problem is that
it's actually completely irrelevant to
the question which is an interesting one
and a good one that should be taken
seriously of whether or not men and
women actually are paid the same amount
to do the same kind of work or the same
amount of work or the same quality of
work at the University of Toronto Canada
which is a very large employer as to
some extent representative of these
problems throughout many sectors of the
economy the University of Toronto does
not have much resemblance to a gold mine
whether or not men and women are paid
the same working as miners is a
different question it's not that similar
to working in the fire department
however there were a lot of large
companies offices of course schools and
what-have-you where you will encounter
many of the same issues that the issues
that arose in people sincerely trying to
measure the width of the wage gap trying
to establish whether or not there was an
equal pay
and women doing the same kind of work so
this is really the one and only
statistic I want to confront you with
this is the list of the highest-paid
individuals at the University of Toronto
you'll notice that just two of them are
highlighted in yellow take a good look
this is an institution with extreme wage
inequality and something I've discussed
in this channel again and again and
again is that economic inequality very
often has nothing to do with helping the
poor all right at the top of this chart
we have someone earning more than $1 a
year at the bottom of this chart we have
someone earning $390,000 years these are
all rich people it's inequalities
economical it's extreme economic
inequality but everyone in this picture
is a wealthy person if not extremely
wealthy right
why are just two of the numbers
highlighted in yellow I highlighted them
in yellow because those are the only two
female employees in this chart everyone
else is male so this already is a really
instructive demonstration of why it is
so difficult in terms of serious social
science research to establish the
inequality of male and female pay scales
the main benefits salaries being paid to
people when you're in institution where
positions such as the professor of
Finance is a male position the professor
of marketing the professor of economics
I hate these the most highly paid
positions are dominated by men you do
not see here the professor of poetry
right somewhere much further down the
list I'm now allowed out there living in
poverty right I don't see the professor
of French right these are positions
that's stereotypically have female
professors and I know I had many many
female
when I was in university oh no my German
professors two of them were women and so
on you know in many many different
subjects I know that one of the
professors of Buddhism and Buddhist
philosophy is a female for some reason
the professor of Finance and the
professor of management and professor of
economics these people are earning much
much much more money than the professor
of poetry the professor of French
professor of Buddhism so on and so forth
and that question which is tremendously
meaningful and tremendously important is
not examined by dr. Jordan Peterson it's
not examined by the third wave and
fourth wave feminists of our time that's
actually an unbelievably important
question now I am in some ways more
radical and more left-wing than Bernie
Sanders and I am in some ways more
conservative than Jordan Peterson let's
keep it all the way real I am a mix of
contradictory political impulses but I
actually think it is an injustice to pay
the professor of Finance and the
professor of economics so much more than
the professor of French and the
professor of English and I think if you
break it down it's at least possible
that the person who is teaching French
is doing more work more hours of work
harder work and maybe even more
important work you know meeting with
students face-to-face and helping them
learn this language then the professor
of Finance like maybe if you had a fair
system of bonuses maybe at least some
years some of the time some of the
French teachers would be paid more than
the professor of management maybe
sometimes the professor of poetry person
I think there is actually a real
question of justice and injustice given
that fundamentally all of these jobs
boil down to standing in front of a
chalkboard lecture in a room full of
students grading papers grading essays
collecting exams right there's a sense
there is a fundamental equality to the
type of labor here and yet there's a
profound inequality to how these people
are paid that has nothing to do with
gender and yet of course the types of
jobs the types of careers these people
choose are very gendering asymmetrical
right and now you might think you might
think I'm a tremendously macho
testosterone driven individual you would
be wrong I'm someone who wants to lead a
meaningful life and I have a lot more in
common with the women who choose those
lower pay hanging paths in life all
right there is no part of me ever that
has looked at this kind of pay pay scale
and felt motivated to think well I got a
claw my way to the top no I don't even
know why I'm climbing this hill but I
want to be on the top of it I'll be
damned if the the vice dean of marketing
and Business Studies earns more than me
I'm I got to do whatever it takes to be
in the top 10 of these highly paid I
would never be motivated that way right
I would be in one of those other
departments asking totally different
questions about how I can live a
meaningful life and how I can help my
students and how I can do important
research and make the world a better
place you know so I'm not motivated by
money in this way and that puts me into
that stereotypically female gender role
but by the way when I when I had a kid
I'm divorced but you know I was a
full-time stay-at-home dad so just just
want to put that in their first year of
my daughter's life I was a full-time
stay-at-home uh-huh and it was great
I was it was wonderful I got to see my
daughter take her first steps and chew
her first solid food and all that stuff
got to have all those great moments with
my daughter during her during her first
year of life would it be an exaggeration
to say I heard her say her first words
she made some made some sounds all right
so let's turn in this question so you
know of assets even if you're just
looking at this one chart of how
difficult it is to pin down precisely
what the gender gap is but you know what
the University of Toronto employs
exactly the sort of people who have that
skill set so this is the strange thing
about dr. Jordan Peterson this
controversy has been haunting him his
whole life when I was a student a
University of Toronto decades ago it
haunted me and my life was a huge
controversy there he's been at the
center of this storm and he's been
commenting on the press for all these
years and it's very strangely he never
took an interest in the social science
process of analysis to identify whether
or not there was a problem and
to mathematically determine the extent
of the problem so you don't need a
background of math to understand this is
how do you proceed you start with the
Union rules for who gets paid how much
because there are very strict rules
negotiated between unions and
universities who's getting what raise
from what salary from what starting
point for doing what job you start
looking on a unit-by-unit basis for
evidence that say two different
professors of poetry who've both been
professors for the same number of years
and had the same number of promotions
and who check the same boxes on the
Union pay scale is there a difference
between men and women when you are as
precisely as possible
comparing their achievements in the type
of work they do in an academic setting
like University of Toronto that also
requires you to itemize how many books
they've published how many peer-reviewed
articles they've polish sometimes even
the quality of those books right you're
gonna have to break that down because
one professor of poetry is not equal to
another and their pay is not equal he's
able that's because this professor had a
hit book so then you're gonna have to
come with okay how many dollars is a hit
book worth as opposed to a less
successful book or a book with a great
poet they had to break down these things
as finely as possible all right and then
calculate any inequalities between males
and females department by department
position by position to establish if
there were a gender bias and what had
added up to ten years later the numbers
are in 1.3 percent men were being paid
1.3 percent more than women when you
really did the math to establish how
much of the difference in pay is
attributable to gender bias as opposed
to all of these palpable factors so the
University of Toronto provides us with a
fascinating powerful and insightful case
study of what happens when we move past
the initial sticker shock of just
looking in university and saying wow all
the people who are making more than
$400,000 are male I'm sorry there was
one female in the list there's one
professor of accounting who's female
everyone else making more than $400,000
is male it's very easy to just look at
that and say oh this is gender
inequality this is oppression this is an
injustice
now I am actually the important yin that
there is an injustice I think there is a
profound and important injustice in how
education is organized but it is not
principally an injustice of men
oppressing women I would describe it
frankly as a kind of aristocracy we now
live in a society where arbitrarily some
people have these positions of
unquestioned power Authority and nearly
unlimited finances and universities and
you may feel their merited but plenty of
people who live within aristocratic
societies felt that the privilege of the
people in charge was based on merit -
I'll tell you something about these
people earning four hundred thousand
five hundred thousand even a million
dollars nobody elected them nobody
questions them nobody cross-examines the
merit of their publications and asks are
you really worth four thousand dollars
nobody evaluates the quality of the
education they're delivering to students
and asks are you actually training
people with useful skills that justifies
your salary $14,000 there are a lot of
really important questions but when we
did the social science research funded
basically by a legal core challenge seen
through by a labor union and a dispute
turb you know and ultimately ending with
a small but significant sum of money
being paid to women who were proven to
be paid slightly too little for the jobs
that were doing the university the
number that came up at the end of that
investigation was 1.3 percent the much
more profound inequality of the society
we live in is that imbeciles like jordan
peterson end up in a pulpit in a
position of
real power and influence where they can
go on for decades self-indulgent Li
promoting their own peculiar air sets
ideology and seemingly never showing
even the slightest interest into facts
facts someone like I was able to turn up
with just a few Google searches what is
the value of an education when it's in
the hands of someone like Jordan
Peterson someone who has used his
position of power frankly to preach his
peculiar doctrine about wage inequality
between men and women while sitting in
the eye of the storm of the University
of Toronto a place where this research
wasn't folding right before his very
eyes with very real consequences for him
and for his fellow colleagues at that
same University
[Music]